The Brannon outfit -- known as the because of its brand -- reached Hondo Creek before sundown . The herd was watered and then thrown onto a grass flat which was to be the night's bedground . Two of the hands , a Mexican named Jose Amado and a kid known only as Laredo , were picked for the trick of riding night herd . The rest of the crew offsaddled their mounts and turned them into the remuda . They got cups of coffee from the pot on the coosie's fire , rolled and lighted brown-paper cigarettes , lounged about . There was some talk , a discussion of this or that happening during the drive . But they deliberately avoided the one subject that had them all : the failure of the wife and son to join the outfit . It especially bothered the hands . The cook , Mateo Garcia , had arrived there before the herd . He'd started a fire and put coffee on , and now was at the work board of his chuck wagon . He was readying a batch of biscuits for the Dutch oven . Supper would be within the hour . The Maguire family was setting up a camp nearby . Billie had unhitched the mules from both Tom Brannon's and his father's wagon . Hank had gathered wood for a cookfire , and his wife was at it now . Conchita kept an eye on the twins and Elena , trying to keep them from falling into the creek by which they persisted in playing . Conchita nagged at the children , attempting without success to keep her thoughts off Tom Brannon . Tom Brannon had caught up with the outfit shortly after the Maguires joined it , which had been at midday . He'd come alone , without his wife and child . He'd been in an mood : Conchita had thought his face almost ugly with the anger in him . She wondered what had taken place in town , between him and his wife . She wished that she could talk to her mother about it . Not that her mother knew what had happened , but they could speculate upon it . But her mother would rebuke her if she mentioned it , and say that it was none of her concern . `` Pat , get out of that creek ! ! You too , ! ! Elena , you'll get mud all over your dress '' ! ! Even as she called to the children , Conchita let her Tom Brannon . Tomas , she called him -- as the Mexican hands did . He was in conversation with her father and the vaquero , Luis Hernandez . Whatever they are talking about ? ? Conchita wondered . It bothered her that she probably would never know . Certainly , she wouldn't ask her father afterward . He would tell her not to pry into affairs -- as though she were a kid like Elena ! ! At the moment , the three men were not saying of anything . They were sitting on their heels , rider-fashion , over by the still calf wagon . Brannon was hunkered down with his to the rear wheel , with the two facing him . He held a cigarette in his hand . It was burning away , forgotten . His face was clouded with . He'd told Hank Maguire and Luis Hernandez about his wife's refusal to come with him and about what he now intended to do . They were considering it gravely , neither seeming to like what he planned . Finally Hernandez said , `` I could offer you advice , Tomas , but you wouldn't heed it '' . `` hear it , anyway '' . `` Wait a while . Let Senora Brannon live in her father's house for a time . Give her time to miss you . Maybe she will then come to you . After all , you want the senora as as you want the boy . You need her even than you need him '' . `` She won't change her mind '' , Brannon said . `` John Clayton will see to that '' . `` But after a time away from you . '' `` A year , Luis ? ? Five ? ? Ten ? ? How should I wait '' ? ? `` Maybe in a year , Tomas . '' `` In a year she'll like living in Clayton's house too to come back to me '' , Brannon said flatly . `` And the boy will be too under his influence by then . I've got to take Danny away from Clayton before I lose him altogether . Hell , in a year or five or ten , the boy will have forgotten me -- his father '' ! ! `` But to take him and leave his mother behind is not '' . `` In my place , you'd follow advice as you give me '' ? ? Hernandez looked suddenly . `` That I can't answer , for I can't something like this happening to me . Maybe I should withdraw my advice -- no '' ? ? Brannon looked at Hank Maguire . `` And you ? ? What would you do in my place '' ? ? Hank shook his head . `` I don't know , Tom . Like Luis , I can't see something like this happening to me . With Maria and me , there's never any problem . Where I go , she goes -- and the kids with us . You're going to need your woman . And the boy will need his mother . If you take the one , you'd better take both '' . Brannon shook his head . `` I won't Beth to come against her will . But I'm going to have my son '' . They were for a while , each looking glum . Finally Luis Hernandez said , `` What must be , must be . I am with you , of course , Tomas '' . And Hank Maguire added , `` So am I , Tom '' . `` All right '' , Brannon said , rising . `` ride out as soon as we've had chuck '' . Brannon timed it so that they rode in an hour after nightfall . They had for cover both darkness and a summer storm . During of the ride they had watched a display of lightning in the sky to the east . Later , they'd heard the rumble of thunder and then , just Rockfork , they ran into rain . Those who had slickers donned them . The others put on coats or ducking jackets , whichever they carried behind their cantles . There were seven of them , enough for a show of strength -- to run a bluff . It was to be nothing than that . There was to be no gunplay . If the bluff failed and they ran into trouble , Brannon had told the others , they would withdraw -- and he would come after his son another time . He didn't want to put himself outside the law . With him were Hank Maguire , Luis Hernandez , and Luis's son Pedro . The Ramirez brothers were also along . The man was Red Hogan , a puncher with a streak and a liking for hell-raising . They were all men . It was , because of the storm . Also because of the storm , the streets of Rockfork were deserted . Lighted windows glowed through the downpour . They reined in before the town marshal's office , a building on Main Street . A lamp burned inside , but Brannon , peering through the window , saw that the office was . He'd hoped to catch Jesse Macklin there . `` Probably just stepped out '' , he said . `` Maybe to have supper . Red , come along . The rest of you wait here '' . With Red Hogan , he rode to the Welcome Cafe . Hogan got down from the saddle and had a look inside . `` Not there '' , he said , getting back onto his horse . `` Maybe he's at the hotel '' . They rode to the Rockfork House , a farther along the side of the street . They reined in there , Brannon remaining in the saddle while Hogan went to look for Jesse Macklin in the hotel dining room . Brannon had no slicker . He'd put on his corduroy coat and it was already soaked . But he felt no discomfort . He was only vaguely of the sluicing rain . He hardly noticed the flashes of lightning and the claps of thunder . Hogan reappeared , stopped on the hotel porch , lifted a hand in signal . Brannon dismounted and climbed the steps . `` He's finished eating '' , Hogan said . `` Sitting with a cup of coffee now . It shouldn't be '' . It seemed long , at to Tom Brannon . He and Hogan waited by the door , one to either side . Macklin was the man to come out , and he came unhurriedly . He was puffing on a cigar , and he was turning up his coat collar against the rain . It was not until he moved across the porch that he became of them , and then it was too . They closed in fast , kept him from reaching inside his coat for his gun . `` Just come along '' , Brannon told him . `` Don't start anything you can't '' . `` Now , listen '' -- Macklin began . `` We'll talk over at your office '' . `` Brannon , I warn you '' ! ! `` Let's go , Marshal '' , Brannon said , and took him by the arm . Hogan gripped the lawman's arm . They escorted him down from the porch and through the rain to his office . The five Slash-B men followed them inside , crowding the room . His face was with anger when they let go of his arms . He looked at each of them in turn , Brannon of all . `` I'll remember you '' , he said . `` Every one of you . As for you , Brannon '' -- `` Put your gun on the desk , Marshal '' . `` Now , hold on , damn it ; ; I won't '' -- Red Hogan's patience ran out . He lifted the skirt of Macklin's coat , took his gun from its holster , tossed it onto the desk . `` Too much fooling around '' , he said . `` Don't press your luck , badge-toter '' . Brannon said , `` Now the key to the lockup , Marshal '' . `` Key '' ? ? Macklin said . `` What for '' ? ? `` Can't you guess '' ? ? Brannon said . `` We're putting you where you won't come to harm . Come on -- the key . Get it out '' ! ! `` Damned if I will . Brannon , you've assaulted a law officer and '' -- They moved in on him , crowded him from all sides . No man laid a hand on him , but the threat of violence was there . His face took on a pallor , became beaded with sweat , and he seemed to have trouble with his breathing . He held out a moment longer , then his nerve gave under the pressure . He swore , and said , `` All right . It's here in my pocket '' . `` Get it out '' , Brannon ordered . Then , as Macklin obeyed : `` Now let's go out back '' . Resignedly , Macklin turned to the back door . They followed him into the rain and across to the squat stone building feet to the rear . The door of the lockup was of planks and banded with strap iron . It was secured by an padlock . Macklin balked again , not wanting to unlock and the door . They crowded him in that threatening way once more , forced him to give in . Once the door was open , they crowded him inside the building . He was uttering threats in a but voice when they closed and padlocked the door . They returned to the street , mounted their horses , rode through the rain to the house on Houston Street . Its windows glowed with lamplight . Deputy Marshal Luke Harper still stood guard on the veranda , a forlorn , figure in the murky dark . He came to the edge of the veranda , peered down at them with his hand on his gun . `` Don't try it '' , Brannon told him , dismounting and starting up the steps with his men following . `` Don't get yourself killed for something that doesn't concern you '' . He strode past the now man , entered the house . Miguel and Arturo Ramirez remained on the veranda to keep Harper from interfering . The others followed Brannon inside . They trailed him across the hallway to the parlor , four roughly garbed and men who probably had never before ventured into a house . They brought to it all the odors that clung to men like themselves , that of their sweat , of campfire smoke , of horses and cattle . They tracked mud on the floor , on the carpet . Their presence fouled the elegance of that room .